Add The Things Fundamentals (#448)
TheThingsNetwork/docs: doc/content/lorawan/what-is-lorawan/index.md

---
title: What is LoRa and LoRaWAN
section: The Things Fundamentals
weight: 20
---

> Welcome to the first chapter of the Things Fundamentals on LoRaWAN. In this section, you'll learn about the difference between LoRa and LoRaWAN, some great LoRaWAN use cases, and the LoRa Alliance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Welcome to the first chapter of The Things Fundamentals on LoRaWAN. In this section, you'll learn about the difference between LoRa and LoRaWAN, some great LoRaWAN use cases, and the LoRa Alliance role.
```

### LoRa

> LoRa is a wireless modulation technique derived from **Chirp Spread Spectrum (CSS)** technology. It encodes information on radio waves using chirp pulses - similar to the way dolphins and bats communicate! LoRa modulated transmission is robust against disturbances and can be received across great distances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LoRa is a wireless modulation technique derived from **Chirp Spread Spectrum (CSS)** technology. It encodes information on radio waves using chirp pulses - similar to the way dolphins and bats communicate!
```

Reviewer: Maybe just a short explanation of what chirp pulse is

Don’t be alarmed about the complex terms; **LoRa modulation** and **Chirp Spread Spectrum technology** are simple to understand in practice. In case you are curious, in this video, **Richard Wenner** explains how **Chirp Spread Spectrum technology** works: 

{{< youtube "dxYY097QNs0" >}}

> LoRa is ideal for applications that transmit small chunks of data with low bit rates. Data can be transmitted at a longer range compared to technologies like WiFi, Bluetooth or ZigBee. LoRa is well suited for sensors and actuators that operate in low power mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LoRa modulated transmission is robust against disturbances and can be received across great distances. It is ideal for applications that transmit small chunks of data with low bit rates. Data can be transmitted at a longer range compared to technologies like WiFi, Bluetooth or ZigBee. These features make LoRa well suited for sensors and actuators that operate in low power mode.
```

LoRa can be operated on the license free **sub-gigahertz** bands, for example, 915 MHz, 868 MHz, and 433 MHz. It also can be operated on **2.4 GHz** to achieve higher data rates compared to sub-gigahertz bands, at the cost of range. These frequencies fall into **ISM bands** that are reserved internationally for **industrial**, **scientific**, and **medical** purposes.

### LoRaWAN

**LoRaWAN** is a **Media Access Control (MAC)** layer protocol built on top of LoRa modulation. It is a software layer which defines how devices use the LoRa hardware, for example when they transmit, and the format of messages.

> The LoRaWAN protocol is developed and maintained by the [LoRa Alliance](https://lora-alliance.org/). The first LoRaWAN specification was released in January 2015. The table below shows the version history of the LoRaWAN specifications. At the time of this writing the latest specifications are 1.0.4 (in 1.0 series) and 1.1 (1.1 series).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The LoRaWAN protocol is developed and maintained by the [LoRa Alliance](https://lora-alliance.org/). The first LoRaWAN specification was released in January 2015. The table below shows the version history of the LoRaWAN specifications. At the time of writing this chapter, the latest specifications are 1.0.4 (1.0 series) and 1.1 (1.1 series).
```

<table>
  <tr>
   <td><strong>Version</strong>
   </td>
   <td><strong>Release date</strong>
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>1.0
   </td>
   <td>January 2015
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>1.0.1
   </td>
   <td>February 2016
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>1.0.2
   </td>
   <td>July 2016
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>1.1
   </td>
   <td>October 2017
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>1.0.3
   </td>
   <td>July 2018
   </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
   <td>1.0.4
   </td>
   <td>October 2020
   </td>
  </tr>
</table>

## Why is LoRaWAN so awesome?

*   **Ultra low power** - LoRaWAN end devices are optimized to operate in low power mode and the battery lifetime on coin cells can be up to 10 years.

> *   **Long range** - LoRaWAN gateways can transmit and receive signals over a distance of over 10 kilometers in rural areas and up to 3 kilometers in dense urban areas depending on how deep indoors the end devices are located.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Long range** - LoRaWAN gateways can transmit and receive signals over a distance of over 10 kilometers in rural areas and up to 3 kilometers in dense urban areas.
```

Reviewer: This depends on few more things, so I think it's better to keep this list short and straightforward

*   **Deep indoor penetration** - LoRaWAN networks can provide deep indoor coverage including multi floor buildings.

> *   **License free spectrum** - you don’t need to obtain a license to deploy a LoRaWAN network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **License free spectrum** - You won't have to pay expensive frequency spectrum license fees to deploy a LoRaWAN network.
```

*   **Geolocation**- A LoRaWAN network can determine the location of your end devices using triangulation without the need for GPS. A LoRa end device can be located if at least three gateways pick up its signal.
*   **High capacity** - LoRaWAN Network Servers handle millions of messages from thousands of gateways. 
*   **Public and private deployments** - It is easy to deploy public and private LoRaWAN networks using the same hardware (gateways, end devices, antennas) and software (UDP packet forwarders, Basic Station software, LoRaWAN stacks for end devices).
*   **End-to-end security**- LoRaWAN ensures secure communication between the end device and the application server using AES-128 encryption.

> *   **Firmware updates over the air** - Remotely update firmware (applications and the LoRaWAN stack) for a single-end device or group of end devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Firmware updates over the air** - You can update the firmware (applications and the LoRaWAN stack) remotely for a single end device or a group of end devices.
```

> *   **Roaming**- Seamless handovers of an end device from one network to another.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Roaming**- LoRa end devices can perform seamless handovers from one network to another.
```

*   **Low cost** - Minimal infrastructure, low-cost end nodes and open source software.
*   **Certification program**- The LoRa Alliance certification program certifies end devices and provides end-users with confidence that the devices are reliable and compliant with the LoRaWAN specification.
*   **Ecosystem**- LoRaWAN has a very large ecosystem of device makers, gateway makers, antenna makers, network service providers, and application developers.

## LoRaWAN use cases

> Here are a few great LoRaWAN use cases that will give you a better insight into how LoRaWAN can be applied (source: [Semtech](https://info.semtech.com/lora-everywhere)):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are a few great LoRaWAN use cases provided by [Semtech](https://info.semtech.com/lora-everywhere), that can give you a better insight into how LoRaWAN can be applied:
```

*   **Vaccine cold chain monitoring** - LoRaWAN sensors are used to ensure vaccines are kept at appropriate temperatures in transit.
*   **Animal conservation** - Tracking sensors manage endangered species such as Black Rhinos and Amur Leopards.
*   **Dementia patients** - Wristband sensors provide fall detection and medication tracking 
*   **Smart farms**- Real time insights into crop soil moisture, optimized irrigation schedule reduce water use up to 30%.
*   **Water conservation**- Identification and faster repair of leaks in a city's water network.
*   **Food safety**- Temperature monitoring ensures food quality
*   **Smart waste bins** - Waste bin level alerts sent to staff optimizes pickup schedule.
*   **Smart bikes**- Bike trackers track bikes in remote areas and dense buildings.
*   **Airport tracking** - GPS-free tracking monitors vehicles, personnel, and luggage.
*   **Efficient workspaces** - Monitors room occupancy, temperature, energy usage, and parking availability.
*   **Cattle health** - Sensors monitor cattle health, detect diseases and forecast delivery of calves.

> *   **LoRa in space** - Satellites to provide LoRaWAN-based coverage worldwide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Vaccine cold chain monitoring** - LoRaWAN sensors are used to ensure vaccines are kept at appropriate temperatures in transit.
*   **Animal conservation** - Tracking sensors manage endangered species such as Black Rhinos and Amur Leopards.
*   **Dementia patients** - Wristband sensors provide fall detection and medication tracking.
*   **Smart farms**- Real time insights into crop soil moisture and optimized irrigation schedule reduce water use up to 30%.
*   **Water conservation**- Identification and faster repair of leaks in a city's water network.
*   **Food safety**- Temperature monitoring ensures food quality maintenance.
*   **Smart waste bins** - Waste bin level alerts sent to staff optimize the pickup schedule.
*   **Smart bikes**- Bike trackers track bikes in remote areas and dense buildings.
*   **Airport tracking** - GPS-free tracking monitors vehicles, personnel and luggage.
*   **Efficient workspaces** - Room occupancy, temperature, energy usage and parking availability monitoring.
*   **Cattle health** - Sensors monitor cattle health, detect diseases and forecast calves delivery time.
*   **LoRa in space** - Satellites to provide LoRaWAN-based coverage worldwide.
```

> ## Bandwidth vs Range

Reviewer: I think this section would be better right after LoRaWAN or Why is LoRaWAN so awesome? because you're mentioning it there, and you don't want to jump back to generic properties again after talking about commercial use cases
